---
layout:     post
title:      Magia y Palabras
date:       2015-02-01 13:46:00
summary:    Borges being Borges
categories: 
  - borges
  - quotations
  - translation
---

_Full disclosure: I can only find this passage on Twitter. The account's purported administrator [writes that](https://borgesyyo.wordpress.com/criterio-del-twitter/) he may modify some passages to be fit for Twitter. To a neophyte at least, my inconclusive search for the source text seems appropriately Borgesian._

Actively learning a foreign language has destabilized a lot of my gut feelings about language. I can still recall some semiotic gymastics from college, and a few years of news consumption has attuned me to public figures' expansions and modulations of English words, but nothing illustrates language's arbitrariness quite like learning that _lapiz_ and _pencil_ actually mean the same thing. To me, it is seems clear that pencil (and _lapiz_) mean the same thing because they conjure very similar images in a specific set of peoples' minds.

With that in mind, I turn to this tweet from an account that seeks to spread Borges awareness:

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" lang="en"><p>Una magia que no estaba en las palabras, sino en lo que las palabras dejaban adivinar, en lo que se traslucía detrás de esas palabras.</p>&mdash; Borges, Jorge Luis (@BorgesJorgeL) <a href="https://twitter.com/BorgesJorgeL/status/441061843076128768">March 5, 2014</a></blockquote>
<script async src="//platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

A humble attempt at translation (no guarantees on accuracy, here):

> A magic that was not within the words themselves, but in that which the words left to be [divined](http://lema.rae.es/drae/?val=adivinar), in that which one [surmised](http://lema.rae.es/drae/?val=traslucirse) behind these words.

The above translation hinges on two words that I don't fully understand. The first one is _adivinar_ (which corresponds to 'divined' in my translation), a multilayered word that [can mean](http://lema.rae.es/drae/?val=adivinar):

1. predict the future or discover the hidden, by means of omens or spells
2. discover something hidden through conjecture 
3. correctly solve a puzzle/riddle
4. correctly guess something by luck
5. distinguish hazily; distinguish from a distance

The verb "divine" seems horribly antiquated, perhaps because divination itself seems like an antiquated practice. In contemporary use, I'm fairly sure I have only seen it used to attack or discredit ("and what has he divined from the quarterly stats?"). Nonetheless, it's the best word I can think of for the job. 

The second tough word is _traslucir_. This one [can mean](http://lema.rae.es/drae/?val=traslucir):

1. Surmise or infer something based on some antecedent or sign
2. Said of an object: be translucent

In this novice's judgement, inferances via _traslucir_ seem more scientific than inferences via _adivinar_ (_traslucir_ has _antecedents_, for Pete's sake!). Perhaps @BorgesJorgeL used these two terms as complements. The mystical _adivinar_ and more logical _traslucir_ combine to get at the strange, structured haziness of language comprehension.
